# plant-watering-system
An automated plant watering system designed to nurture plants efficiently while minimizing the water usage. Separate functional implementations in MATLAB and Java

INTRODUCTION: This project involves using a combination of hardware and software to develop an automatic plant monitoring and control system. OBJECTIVES: The objectives of this project were to create a program that can monitor the moisture of a plant’s soil and water it as required. DESIGN ANALYSIS: Applying the idea of a state machine that takes actions based on things that are measured. This concept is the fundamental building block for this project. PROCEDURE: MATLAB was used to create a program that resembles a state machine for controlling the water flow in the system based on the moisture measured. This was done using an endless while loop (until physically terminated) with conditional if statements embedded in the loop that check whether the measured soil voltage was within a range of values. Commands are then relayed to the actuator to control the pump depending on the voltage measured. In addition, a mathematical model, in the form of a user-defined function, was created to convert the voltage measured in the soil to a “moisture level” with a scale of 0 to 1. A live updating graph showing the moisture level of the soil as time goes on is then displayed. RESULTS: Computer can be connected to Arduino board for days or weeks at a time and the soil would receive water and a visual feed of the moisture level in the soil will be created automatically. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS: It is much simpler to grasp how a system operates and the most effective ways to go about developing it when a key concept (state machines in this case) serves as the core foundation. User-defined functions can make it easier to convert data to suit the program.

JAVA INTRODUCTION
This project involves using a combination of hardware and software to develop an automatic plant monitoring and control system. It is based on an Arduino and is controlled with Java using IntelliJ. This system allows long-term monitoring of plant soil to ensure that a plant receives water as it needs it.
CONTEXT
Plants are a very vital part of the environment; they help maintain the planet by absorbing carbon dioxide and releasing oxygen. Many people own plants but often forget to water them during their day- to-day activities. Thus, a system is required to handle this task automatically. By adding an automated plant watering system to a garden or agricultural field, it ensures that all plants reach their fullest potential while minimizing the amount of water wasted.

LEARNING OUTCOMES
This project addresses all the learning outcomes required for the minor project.
• As a result of working on this project, I demonstrated the ability to test and debug a given program and reason its correctness because I was able to test the functionality of the program in an iterative process using my plant and modifying my program when necessary. Testing and debugging were vital for this project because they ensured that I used my plant to test my program at every stage
and verify that I achieved my end goals.
• Through this project I built an application that met the given requirements using a suitable API and problem specifications. The problem specifications and required outcomes for the minor project were all met, and the appropriate API (Firmata4j) was used in order to do so.
• This project involves an event-driven application that controls sensors and actuators in order to connect events to physical actions. The event-driven nature of the project is evident in its ability to measure soil moisture and display output based on what was measured as well as use of a button to terminate the program. The use of the moisture sensor, pump, and OLED display shows the use of an event-driven application to connect events to physical actions because the moisture sensor worked as an input device, and the reading from the sensor was able to trigger the pump and produce output on the OLED display.
• Through this project, I was able to program an application from a variety of engineering disciplines using Java, an object-oriented language, and solve it on the computer. This application can be utilized by environmental engineers to offer insight as to how the program can be expanded to improve plant health. In addition, implementing this system creates opportunities for software engineers to showcase innovation through different programs.
